---
layout: post
title: Starting out with Elixir streams
category: elixir
tags: enum stream
excerpt: When processing very large collections or streaming data, Elixir's Enum module may not be your best choice. Instead, look to Elixir's Stream module for a set of functions that can help you out.
---

In Elixir you quickly learn that the Enum module[^1] is your go-to location for dealing with lists of data. But the functions in the Enum module only work on collections implementing the Enumerable protocol.[^2] That means that when you use the functions in Enum, you're typically (not necessarily *always*) working with a bounded, in-memory collection of data. What this also means is that the functions in Enum produce results that **are** represented by bounded, in-memory collections of data. So what do you do if you're not just processing collections of a few JSON objects sent back from Yet Another JAvaScript Web Application?[^3] What if your collection of data is actually too large to be held in memory all at once? For example, the list of JavaScript web frameworks and the list of reasons why people on Twitter are mad are both much too large to be stored purely in RAM on even our most advanced supercomputers.[^4] The Enum module, powerful as it is, is going to fail you if you try to map over the list of every angry tweet. This paradigm of processing every single item in the collection before returning a result is known as eager evaluation.[^5] Fortunately for us and our angry-tweet-mapper, there is an alternative to this: lazy evaluation.[^6] That the complement of **eager** is called *lazy* and not *reluctant*, will forever disappoint me.

Streams are lazy Enumerables, and can represent collections that are any size, even infinite. You work with streams using the somewhat appropriately-named Stream module.[^7] If you compare the list of functions in Enum and Stream, you'll see quite a few similarities, like concat, filter, map, scan, and take. In addition, because Elixir Streams are actually just lazily-implemented Enumerables, you can use them with all the functions in Enum. But you should generally take some precautions beforehand, lest you wind up trying to do something like:

    my_infinite_stream |> Enum.each &IO.puts/1

If you do that, you might find yourself waiting for a while for your program to finish.

Let's start right off working with an infinite list. In this case, let's just create a stream that produces the list of odd natural numbers:

    odds = Stream.iterate(1, fn x -> x + 2 end)

If you enter that into iex, you'll see a return value similar to:
    
    #Function<47.29647706/2 in Stream.unfold/2>

What the iterate function does is create a stream with an initial state (1, in this case), and a function for figuring out the *next* state. It does this by passing the previous state to the function provided, and it's up to you to decide what that function should be.

If you weren't expecting to see that function ref thing as the output, but rather something like
    
    [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35, 37, 39, 41,
     43, 45, 47, 49, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81,
     83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, 99, ...]

remember that streams are *lazy*, so we're not storing a list of odd numbers anywhere, we're storing a function that *knows how to generate the list of odd natural numbers*.

To actually get a list of numbers, we'll use the `take` function of the Enum module:

    Enum.take(odds, 100)

Now you'll see a list of actual numbers, and not just some weird function ref thing. The `take` function's two arguments are the Enumerable to, *ahem*, "take" things from, and the number of elements you want to "take".[^8]

If you're in iex, it's likely that you won't actually see 100 elements in that list, it will probably cut it off somewhere early, like we see above. If you really want to prove that there's 100 odd numbers in the result, you can pipe the output of the take function into a call to Enum.each, like this:

    Enum.take(odds, 100) |> Enum.each &IO.puts/1

Which will print to the screen the first 100 odd numbers.

You can increase the size you pass to `take` to see that our `odds` stream can very quickly generate a pretty big list. On my five year-old MacBook, it only takes about three seconds to generate the first million odd naturals:

    :timer.tc(fn -> Enum.take(odds, 1_000_000) end)
    {3295166,
    [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35, 37, 39, 41,
     43, 45, 47, 49, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79,
     81, 83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, ...]}

(Note that it will take quite a bit longer to do the `Enum.each &IO.puts/1` bit from above, as printing each number to the screen is relatively slow.)

Now that we're able to build an infinite list, we should probably figure out something actually useful we can do with it. That will be the subject of the next entry.

[^1]: [http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Enum.html](http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Enum.html)

[^2]: [http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Enumerable.html](http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Enumerable.html)

[^3]: I know it's hard to believe, but there was a time when people wrote software *other* than YA-JAWAs!

[^4]: This may not technically be true, since "our" here refers to me and my dog, Penelope. Neither of us own a supercomputer.

[^5]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eager_evaluation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eager_evaluation)

[^6]: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_evaluation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_evaluation)

[^7]: [http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Stream.html](http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Stream.html)

[^8]: If you're like me and have been programming for a while in imperative languages, you'll find function names like `take` deeply unsettling, because they seem to do exactly what they're named.